{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Bahnschrift;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\f0\fs56\lang9 THEORY OF INTRODUCTION OOPS    INTRODUCTION\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 1.Introduction to C++\par
\fs40 Q.What are the key differences between Procedural Programming and ObjectOrientedProgramming (OOP)?\par
Procedural Programming vs. Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)\par
Procedural Programming and Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) are two fundamental programming paradigms with distinct approaches to problem-solving. Here's a breakdown of their key differences: \~ \par
Focus\par
Procedural Programming: Primarily focuses on procedures or functions, which are sets of instructions to perform specific tasks. \~ \par
OOP: Centers around objects, which encapsulate data (attributes) and methods (functions) that operate on that data. \~ \par
Data and Functions\par
Procedural Programming: Data and functions are typically separate entities. Data can be accessed and manipulated freely by functions. \~ \par
OOP: Data and functions are bundled together within objects. Objects control the access and manipulation of their own data. \~ \par
Modularity\par
Procedural Programming: Programs are divided into functions, which can be reused but may not be as modular as classes in OOP. \~ \par
OOP: Programs are organized into classes, which can be reused and extended through inheritance, leading to greater modularity and code reusability. \~ \par
Data Abstraction\par
Procedural Programming: Offers limited data abstraction.\par
OOP: Provides strong data abstraction through encapsulation, where the internal details of an object are hidden from the outside world. \~ \par
Inheritance and Polymorphism\par
Procedural Programming: Lacks the concepts of inheritance and polymorphism. \~ \par
OOP: Supports inheritance, allowing classes to inherit properties and behaviors from other classes, and polymorphism, enabling objects of different classes to be treated as objects of a common type. \~ \par
Real-World Modeling\par
Procedural Programming: Less suitable for modeling real-world entities and their relationships.\par
OOP: Well-suited for modeling real-world objects and their interactions, as it aligns more closely with how we perceive the world. \~ \par
In Summary:\par
Feature\tab Procedural Programming\tab Object-Oriented Programming\par
Focus\tab Procedures/Functions\tab Objects\par
Data and Functions\tab Separate\tab Encapsulated within objects\par
Modularity\tab Functions\tab Classes\par
Data Abstraction\tab Limited\tab Strong\par
Inheritance and Polymorphism\tab Not Supported\par
Real-World Modeling\tab Less suitable\tab Well-suited\f1\fs22\par
\f0\fs40 Q.List and explain the main advantages of OOP over POP.\par
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) offers several key advantages over Procedural Programming (POP), making it a preferred choice for many modern software development projects: \~ \par
Modularity and Reusability:\par
OOP encourages breaking down complex problems into smaller, self-contained units called objects. \~ \par
These objects can be reused in different parts of the program or even in entirely different applications. \~ \par
This significantly improves code maintainability and reduces development time. \~ \par
Data Encapsulation and Security:\par
OOP allows you to bundle data (attributes) and the methods that operate on that data within an object. \~ \par
This encapsulation protects data from unauthorized access or modification, enhancing the security and integrity of your code. \~ \par
Inheritance:\par
OOP supports inheritance, where new classes can be created based on existing ones, inheriting their properties and behaviors. \~ \par
This promotes code reusability and reduces redundancy, as you don't have to rewrite common code for related objects. \~ \par
Polymorphism:\par
OOP enables objects of different classes to be treated as objects of a common type. \~ \par
This allows for more flexible and adaptable code, making it easier to handle diverse objects in a uniform manner. \~ \par
Real-World Modeling:\par
OOP provides a natural way to model real-world entities and their relationships, as objects closely resemble real-world objects with their attributes and behaviors. \~ \par
This makes it easier to design and implement complex systems that accurately reflect the problem domain. \~ \par
Improved Code Maintainability:\par
The modular structure of OOP makes it easier to understand, modify, and debug code. \~ \par
Changes to one part of the system are less likely to affect other parts, reducing the risk of unintended side effects.\par
Better Software Design:\par
OOP encourages a more structured and organized approach to software development, leading to better-designed and more robust systems. \~ \par
In summary, OOP's advantages in terms of modularity, data encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism, and real-world modeling make it a powerful and versatile paradigm for building complex, scalable, and maintainable software systems.\par
Q.Explain the steps involved in setting up a C++ development environment\par
 Install a C++ Compiler\par
Choose a Compiler:\par
GCC (GNU Compiler Collection): A widely used, powerful, and open-source compiler available on most platforms (Windows, macOS, Linux).\par
Clang: Another excellent open-source compiler known for its speed and helpful diagnostics.\par
Visual Studio (for Windows): A comprehensive IDE with a built-in C++ compiler.\par
Installation:\par
GCC/Clang (on Linux/macOS): Often pre-installed or easily installable through package managers (e.g., apt, brew).\par
GCC/Clang (on Windows): Install using MinGW (Minimalist GNU for Windows) or a similar distribution.\par
Visual Studio (on Windows): Download and install the Visual Studio installer, selecting the "Desktop development with C++" workload.\par
2. Choose a Code Editor or IDE (Integrated Development Environment)\par
Code Editors:\par
VS Code (Visual Studio Code): Lightweight, highly extensible with plugins for C++ support, debugging, and more.\par
Sublime Text: A versatile and fast editor with excellent customization options.\par
Notepad++ (Windows): A simple yet capable editor for Windows.\par
IDEs:\par
Visual Studio (Windows): A full-featured IDE with debugging, code completion, and project management tools.\par
CLion (JetBrains): A powerful and intelligent C++ IDE with excellent code analysis and refactoring capabilities.\par
Code::Blocks: A free and open-source IDE with a user-friendly interface.\par
3. Configure Your Environment (Optional)\par
Set Environment Variables: If necessary, adjust system environment variables to ensure your compiler and other tools are accessible from the command line.\par
Install Additional Tools: Consider installing:\par
CMake: A build system that simplifies the process of compiling and linking C++ projects, especially for larger projects.\par
Git: Version control system for tracking changes to your code.\par
Debugging Tools: GDB (GNU Debugger) is a powerful command-line debugger.\par
4. Create a Simple C++ Program\par
Create a new file (e.g., hello.cpp) and write a basic C++ program:\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    std::cout << "Hello, world!" << std::endl;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
5. Compile and Run Your Program\par
Using the Command Line:\par
GCC/Clang: g++ hello.cpp -o hello (compiles and creates an executable named hello) ./hello (runs the executable)\par
Visual Studio: Open the project in Visual Studio and build/run the project.\par
Using an IDE: Most IDEs provide buttons or menu options for compiling and running your code within the environment.\par
6. Test and Debug\par
Run your program and verify that it produces the expected output.\par
Use debugging tools (like GDB or the debugger in your IDE) to step through your code, inspect variables, and identify and fix any issues.\par
Key Considerations:\par
Choose the right tools for your needs: Consider your experience level, the size and complexity of your projects, and your preferred workflow.\par
Keep your environment updated: Regularly update your compiler and other tools to benefit from bug fixes, performance improvements, and new features.\par
Explore and experiment: Try different tools and configurations to find what works best for you.\par
 Q. What are the main input/output operations in C++? Provide examples.\par
Certainly, here's a breakdown of the main input/output (I/O) operations in C++ along with examples:\par
1. Standard Input/Output (using iostream)\par
cin: This object is used to read input from the standard input stream (usually the keyboard).\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    int age;\par
    std::cout << "Enter your age: "; \par
    std::cin >> age; \par
    std::cout << "Your age is: " << age << std::endl;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
cout: This object is used to write output to the standard output stream (usually the console).\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    std::cout << "Hello, world!" << std::endl;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
cerr: This object is used to write error messages to the standard error stream.\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    int num1, num2;\par
    std::cout << "Enter two numbers: ";\par
    std::cin >> num1 >> num2;\par
    if (num2 == 0) \{\par
        std::cerr << "Error: Division by zero!" << std::endl;\par
        return 1; // Indicate an error\par
    \}\par
    double result = static_cast<double>(num1) / num2;\par
    std::cout << "Result: " << result << std::endl;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
2. File Input/Output (using fstream)\par
ifstream: Used to read data from a file.\par
C++\par
#include <fstream>\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    std::ifstream infile("data.txt"); \par
    if (!infile) \{ \par
        std::cerr << "Error: Could not open file." << std::endl;\par
        return 1; \par
    \}\par
    int number;\par
    while (infile >> number) \{ \par
        std::cout << number << " "; \par
    \}\par
    infile.close(); \par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
ofstream: Used to write data to a file.\par
C++\par
#include <fstream>\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    std::ofstream outfile("output.txt");\par
    if (!outfile) \{ \par
        std::cerr << "Error: Could not open file." << std::endl;\par
        return 1; \par
    \}\par
    outfile << "This is some text written to the file." << std::endl;\par
    outfile.close();\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
fstream: Can be used for both reading and writing to a file.\par
3. Manipulators\par
Manipulators are used to format output. For example:\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <iomanip> // For manipulators\par
int main() \{\par
    double value = 3.14159;\par
    std::cout << std::fixed << std::setprecision(2) << value << std::endl; // Output: 3.14\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Key Points:\par
Always check for errors when opening files.\par
Close files after you're finished using them to prevent data corruption.\par
Use appropriate manipulators to control the appearance of your output.\par
I hope this explanation is helpful! Let me know if you have any further questions.\par
\fs56 2. Variables, Data Types, and Operators\par
\fs40 1. What are the different data types available in C++? Explain with examples.\par
Certainly, let's explore the data types in C++.\par
1. Fundamental Data Types\par
int: Represents whole numbers (e.g., 10, -5, 0).\par
short int, long int, long long int are variations for different integer sizes.\par
float: Represents single-precision floating-point numbers (numbers with decimal points).\par
double: Represents double-precision floating-point numbers, providing higher precision than float.\par
char: Represents a single character (e.g., 'a', '!', '$').\par
bool: Represents a boolean value (either true or false).\par
void: Represents the absence of a type. Used for functions that don't return a value.\par
2. Derived Data Types\par
array: A fixed-size collection of elements of the same data type.\par
int numbers[5]; // An array of 5 integers\par
struct: A user-defined data type that groups variables of different data types under a single name.\par
struct Person \{ std::string name; int age; \};\par
union: A memory location that can hold values of different data types at different times.\par
enum: A user-defined data type that consists of a set of named integer constants.\par
enum Color \{ Red, Green, Blue \};\par
pointer: A variable that stores the memory address of another variable.\par
int* ptr; // A pointer to an integer\par
reference: An alias for another variable.\par
int x = 10; int& ref = x; // ref is a reference to x\par
3. Other Data Types\par
string: Represents a sequence of characters (from the <string> library).\par
Example:\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string>\par
int main() \{\par
    int age = 30;\par
    double pi = 3.14159;\par
    char grade = 'A';\par
    bool is_student = true;\par
    std::string name = "John Doe";\par
    std::cout << "Age: " << age << std::endl;\par
    std::cout << "PI: " << pi << std::endl;\par
    std::cout << "Grade: " << grade << std::endl;\par
    std::cout << "Is Student: " << is_student << std::endl;\par
    std::cout << "Name: " << name << std::endl;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
2. Explain the difference between implicit and explicit type conversion in C++.\par
Certainly, let's break down the difference between implicit and explicit type conversion in C++.\par
Implicit Type Conversion (Automatic Type Conversion)\par
Definition: The compiler automatically converts one data type to another without any explicit instruction from the programmer.\par
Examples:\par
Smaller to Larger Integers:\par
int x = 10;\par
long y = x; // int to long is typically safe\par
char to int:\par
char c = 'A';\par
int i = c; // char is internally represented as an integer\par
int to double:\par
int x = 5;\par
double d = x; // Conversion from integer to floating-point is usually safe\par
Potential Issues:\par
Data Loss: When converting from a larger data type to a smaller one, data can be lost if the value exceeds the smaller type's range.\par
double d = 3.14159;\par
int i = d; // i will be 3, losing the decimal part\par
Explicit Type Conversion (Casting)\par
Definition: The programmer explicitly instructs the compiler to convert one data type to another using a cast operator.\par
Syntax: (target_type)value\par
Examples:\par
double d = 3.14159;\par
int i = (int)d; // Explicitly convert double to int\par
char c = 'A';\par
int i = (int)c; // Explicitly convert char to int\par
Control and Safety:\par
Casts provide more control over type conversions.\par
They can be used to prevent unexpected behavior or data loss.\par
In Summary\par
Implicit conversions are generally safe when converting to a larger data type or between compatible types.\par
Explicit conversions (casting) give the programmer more control and are essential when potential data loss is a concern or when you need to explicitly tell the compiler to perform a conversion that might not be automatically allowed.\par
3.What are the different types of operators in C++? Provide examples of each.\par
Certainly! Here's a breakdown of the different types of operators in C++:\par
1. Arithmetic Operators\par
+ (Addition): Adds two operands.\par
int sum = 10 + 5; // sum will be 15\par
- (Subtraction): Subtracts the second operand from the first.\par
int difference = 10 - 5; // difference will be 5\par
* (Multiplication): Multiplies two operands.\par
int product = 10 * 5; // product will be 50\par
/ (Division): Divides the first operand by the second.\par
double quotient = 10.0 / 3.0; // quotient will be 3.33333...\par
% (Modulo): Gives the remainder after integer division.\par
int remainder = 10 % 3; // remainder will be 1\par
2. Relational Operators\par
> (Greater Than): Checks if the left operand is greater than the right operand.\par
bool result = 10 > 5; // result will be true\par
< (Less Than): Checks if the left operand is less than the right operand.\par
bool result = 5 < 10; // result will be true\par
>= (Greater Than or Equal To): Checks if the left operand is greater than or equal to the right operand.\par
bool result = 10 >= 10; // result will be true\par
<= (Less Than or Equal To): Checks if the left operand is less than or equal to the right operand.\par
bool result = 5 <= 10; // result will be true\par
== (Equal To): Checks if both operands are equal.\par
bool result = 10 == 10; // result will be true\par
!= (Not Equal To): Checks if both operands are not equal.\par
bool result = 10 != 5; // result will be true\par
3. Logical Operators\par
&& (Logical AND): Returns true if both operands are true.\par
bool result = (10 > 5) && (5 < 10); // result will be true\par
|| (Logical OR): Returns true if at least one operand is true.\par
bool result = (10 > 5) || (5 > 10); // result will be true\par
! (Logical NOT): Reverses the logical state of its operand.\par
bool result = !(10 > 5); // result will be false\par
4. Bitwise Operators\par
& (Bitwise AND): Performs bitwise AND operation on the operands.\par
| (Bitwise OR): Performs bitwise OR operation on the operands.\par
^ (Bitwise XOR): Performs bitwise XOR operation on the operands.\par
~ (Bitwise NOT): Performs bitwise NOT operation on the operand.\par
<< (Left Shift): Shifts the bits of the first operand to the left by the number of positions specified by the second operand.\par
>> (Right Shift): Shifts the bits of the first operand to the right by the number of positions specified by the second operand. \~ \par
5. Increment/Decrement Operators\par
++ (Increment): Increases the value of the operand by 1.\par
int x = 5; ++x; // x will be 6\par
-- (Decrement): Decreases the value of the operand by 1.\par
int y = 5; --y; // y will be 4\par
++x (Pre-increment): Increments the value of x before using its value in the expression.\par
x++ (Post-increment): Uses the current value of x in the expression and then increments it.\par
6. Assignment Operators\par
= (Assignment): Assigns the value of the right operand to the left operand.\par
int x = 10;\par
+= (Addition Assignment): Adds the right operand to the left operand and assigns the result to the left operand.\par
x += 5; // Equivalent to x = x + 5;\par
-= (Subtraction Assignment): Subtracts the right operand from the left operand and assigns the result to the left operand.\par
*= (Multiplication Assignment): Multiplies the left operand by the right operand and assigns the result to the left operand.\par
/= (Division Assignment): Divides the left operand by the right operand and assigns the result to the left operand.\par
%= (Modulo Assignment): Performs modulo operation on the left operand with the right operand and assigns the result to the left operand. \~ \par
<<= (Left Shift Assignment): Performs left shift on the left operand by the number of positions specified by the right operand and assigns the result to the left operand.\par
>>= (Right Shift Assignment): Performs right shift on the left operand by the number of positions specified by the right operand and assigns the result to the left operand. \~ \par
7. Member Access Operators\par
. (Dot Operator): Accesses members (data members and member functions) of a class or struct object.\par
-> (Arrow Operator): Accesses members of a pointer to a class or struct object.\par
8. Conditional Operator\par
?: (Ternary Operator): A shorthand for an if-else statement.\par
result = (condition) ? value_if_true : value_if_false;\par
4. Explain the purpose and use of constants and literals in C++.\par
Certainly! Let's break down constants and literals in C++.\par
Constants\par
Purpose:\par
Represent values that do not change throughout the program's execution.\par
Improve code readability and maintainability.\par
Enhance code reliability by preventing accidental modification of critical values.\par
Types:\par
const keyword: Used to declare constant variables.\par
const int MAX_VALUE = 100;\par
const double PI = 3.14159;\par
constexpr keyword: Used to declare constants that can be evaluated at compile time.\par
constexpr int MAX_SIZE = 100;\par
constexpr double GRAVITY = 9.8;\par
Benefits:\par
Readability: Makes the code more self-documenting by giving meaningful names to constant values.\par
Maintainability: If a constant value needs to be changed, you only need to modify the declaration, and the change will be reflected throughout the program.\par
Efficiency: constexpr constants can be used in places where compile-time evaluation is possible, leading to more efficient code.\par
Literals\par
Definition:\par
Direct representations of values within your code.\par
Types:\par
Integer Literals:\par
10, -5, 0, 0xFF (hexadecimal)\par
Floating-Point Literals:\par
3.14, -2.5, 1.2e3 (scientific notation)\par
Character Literals:\par
'a', '?', '\\n' (newline)\par
String Literals:\par
"Hello, world!", "C++ Programming"\par
Boolean Literals:\par
true, false\par
Use Cases:\par
Directly used in expressions and assignments.\par
Can be assigned to variables.\par
Example\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
const double PI = 3.14159; // Constant declaration\par
constexpr int MAX_ATTEMPTS = 3; // Compile-time constant\par
int main() \{\par
    int radius = 5;\par
    double area = PI * radius * radius; \par
    std::cout << "Area of the circle: " << area << std::endl;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
In this example:\par
PI is a const variable representing the value of pi.\par
MAX_ATTEMPTS is a constexpr variable representing the maximum number of attempts.\par
5 and 3.14159 are integer and floating-point literals, respectively.\par
\fs56 3.Control Flow Statements\par
\fs40 1. What are conditional statements in C++? Explain the if-else and switch statements.\par
Certainly, let's explore conditional statements in C++.\par
Conditional Statements\par
Purpose: Conditional statements allow your program to make decisions based on specific conditions. They control the flow of execution by determining which blocks of code should be executed.\par
Key Statements:\par
if statement:\par
Executes a block of code if a given condition is true.\par
C++\par
if (condition \{\par
    // Code to be executed if condition is true\par
\}\par
if-else statement:\par
Executes one block of code if a condition is true, and another block if the condition is false.\par
C++\par
if (condition) \{\par
    // Code to be executed if condition is true\par
\} else \{\par
    // Code to be executed if condition is false\par
\}\par
if-else if-else statement: 1  \~ \par
1.\par
github.com\par
Allows for multiple conditions to be checked sequentially.\par
C++\par
if (condition1) \{\par
    // Code to be executed if condition1 is true\par
\} else if (condition2) \{\par
    // Code to be executed if condition1 is false and condition2 is true\par
\} else \{\par
    // Code to be executed if none of the above conditions are true\par
\}\par
switch statement:\par
Evaluates an expression and executes the code block associated with the matching case.\par
C++\par
switch (expression) \{\par
    case value1:\par
        // Code to be executed if expression equals value1\par
        break;\par
    case value2:\par
        // Code to be executed if expression equals value2\par
        break;\par
    // ... more cases\par
    default:\par
        // Code to be executed if no case matches\par
\}\par
Example (if-else statement)\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    int age;\par
    std::cout << "Enter your age: ";\par
    std::cin >> age;\par
    if (age >= 18) \{\par
        std::cout << "You are an adult." << std::endl;\par
    \} else \{\par
        std::cout << "You are a minor." << std::endl;\par
    \}\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Example (switch statement)\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    char grade;\par
\par
    std::cout << "Enter your grade: ";\par
    std::cin >> grade;\par
\par
    switch (grade) \{\par
        case 'A':\par
            std::cout << "Excellent!" << std::endl;\par
            break;\par
        case 'B':\par
            std::cout << "Good job!" << std::endl;\par
            break;\par
        case 'C':\par
            std::cout << "Satisfactory." << std::endl;\par
            break;\par
        case 'D':\par
        case 'F':\par
            std::cout << "Needs improvement." << std::endl;\par
            break;\par
        default:\par
            std::cout << "Invalid grade." << std::endl;\par
    \}\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
2. What is the difference between for, while, and do-while loops in C++?\par
Certainly, let's explore the differences between the three main loop structures in C++: for, while, and do-while.\par
1. for Loop\par
Structure:\par
C++\par
for (initialization; condition; increment/decrement) \{\par
    // Code to be executed repeatedly\par
\}\par
Execution:\par
Initialization: Executed once before the loop begins. Often used to initialize a loop counter.\par
Condition: Checked before each iteration. If true, the loop body executes. If false, the loop terminates.\par
Loop Body: The code within the loop that is executed repeatedly.\par
Increment/Decrement: Executed after each iteration. Used to modify the loop counter.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) \{ \par
    std::cout << i << " "; \par
\} \par
// Output: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9\par
2. while Loop\par
Structure:\par
C++\par
while (condition) \{\par
    // Code to be executed repeatedly\par
\}\par
Execution:\par
Condition: Checked before each iteration. If true, the loop body executes. If false, the loop terminates.\par
Loop Body: The code within the loop that is executed repeatedly.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
int i = 0; \par
while (i < 10) \{ \par
    std::cout << i << " "; \par
    i++; \par
\} \par
// Output: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9\par
3. do-while Loop\par
Structure:\par
C++\par
do \{\par
    // Code to be executed repeatedly\par
\} while (condition);\par
Execution:\par
Loop Body: The code within the loop is executed at least once.\par
Condition: Checked after each iteration. If true, the loop body executes again. If false, the loop terminates.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
int i = 0; \par
do \{ \par
    std::cout << i << " "; \par
    i++; \par
\} while (i < 10); \par
// Output: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9\par
Key Differences:\par
for: Best suited when the number of iterations is known beforehand.\par
while: Used when the number of iterations is unknown, and the condition is checked before the first iteration.\par
do-while: Guarantees that the loop body executes at least once, as the condition is checked after the first iteration.\par
I hope this explanation clarifies the differences between for, while, and do-while loops in C++!\par
3. How are break and continue statements used in loops? Provide examples.\par
Certainly, let's explore how break and continue statements are used within loops in C++.\par
1. break Statement\par
Purpose: Immediately terminates the entire loop regardless of whether the loop's condition is still true.\par
Usage: Often used to exit a loop prematurely when a certain condition is met.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) \{\par
    if (i == 5) \{\par
        break; // Exit the loop when i reaches 5\par
    \}\par
    std::cout << i << " "; \par
\}\par
// Output: 0 1 2 3 4 \par
2. continue Statement\par
Purpose: Skips the current iteration of the loop and proceeds directly to the next iteration.\par
Usage: Useful when you want to avoid executing certain parts of the loop body for specific conditions.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) \{\par
    if (i % 2 == 0) \{ \par
        continue; // Skip even numbers\par
    \}\par
    std::cout << i << " "; \par
\}\par
// Output: 1 3 5 7 9 \par
In Summary:\par
break terminates the entire loop, while continue only skips the current iteration.\par
break is used to exit the loop prematurely, while continue is used to skip certain parts of the loop body.\par
I hope this explanation clarifies the usage of break and continue statements within loops in C++!\par
4. Explain nested control structures with an example.\par
Certainly! Let's explore nested control structures in C++.\par
Nested Control Structures\par
Definition:\par
Control structures (like if, else if, switch, for, while, do-while) can be nested within each other.\par
This means you can place one control structure inside another.\par
Example: Nested if Statements\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    int age;\par
    std::cout << "Enter your age: ";\par
    std::cin >> age;\par
    if (age >= 18) \{\par
        if (age >= 21) \{\par
            std::cout << "You can legally drink alcohol." << std::endl;\par
        \} else \{\par
            std::cout << "You can vote, but cannot legally drink alcohol." << std::endl;\par
        \}\par
    \} else \{\par
        std::cout << "You are a minor." << std::endl;\par
    \}\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Example: for loop within an if statement\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    int number;\par
    std::cout << "Enter a number: ";\par
    std::cin >> number;\par
    if (number > 0) \{\par
        std::cout << "Positive numbers from 1 to " << number << ":" << std::endl;\par
        for (int i = 1; i <= number; i++) \{\par
            std::cout << i << " ";\par
        \}\par
    \} else \{\par
        std::cout << "The number is not positive." << std::endl;\par
    \}\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Example: if statement within a for loop\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
int main() \{\par
    for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i++) \{\par
        if (i % 2 == 0) \{ \par
            std::cout << i << " is even." << std::endl; \par
        \} else \{\par
            std::cout << i << " is odd." << std::endl; \par
        \}\par
    \}\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Key Considerations:\par
Nesting can make code more complex to read and debug.\par
Use clear indentation to improve readability and maintainability.\par
Consider whether simpler logic can be achieved without excessive nesting.\par
\b 4. Functions and Scope\par
\b0 1.What is a function in C++? Explain the concept of function declaration, definition, and calling\par
Certainly, let's break down the concept of functions in C++.\par
\par
What is a Function in C++?\par
\par
A function is a self-contained block of code that performs a specific task.\par
It's designed to be reusable, meaning you can call (execute) the same block of code multiple times within your program, often with different inputs.\par
This modularity improves code organization, readability, and maintainability.\par
Key Components of a Function:\par
\par
Function Declaration (Prototype):\par
\par
This line tells the compiler about the function's existence before it's actually defined.\par
\par
It specifies:\par
\par
Return Type: The data type of the value the function will return (e.g., int, float, void for no return value).\par
Function Name: A unique identifier for the function.\par
Parameters: A list of input values the function expects, along with their data types (if any).\par
Example:\par
\par
C++\par
\par
int addNumbers(int a, int b); // Declaration of the 'addNumbers' function\par
Function Definition:\par
\par
This is where the actual code for the function is written.\par
\par
It includes:\par
\par
Return Type: Same as in the declaration.\par
Function Name: Same as in the declaration.\par
Parameters: Same as in the declaration.\par
Function Body: The set of statements that perform the desired task.\par
Example:\par
\par
C++\par
\par
int addNumbers(int a, int b) \{ \par
    return a + b; \par
\} \par
Function Calling:\par
\par
This is how you execute the function within your program.\par
\par
You use the function name followed by parentheses, and if the function requires arguments, you provide them within the parentheses.\par
\par
Example:\par
\par
C++\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    int result = addNumbers(5, 3); // Calling the 'addNumbers' function\par
    cout << "The sum is: " << result << endl; \par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Benefits of Using Functions:\par
\par
Code Reusability: Avoids redundant code and makes your program more concise.\par
Modularity: Breaks down complex problems into smaller, more manageable units.\par
Improved Readability: Makes your code easier to understand and maintain.\par
Code Organization: Enhances the overall structure and maintainability of your program.\par
Debugging: Easier to isolate and fix errors within specific functions.\par
2.What is the scope of variables in C++? Differentiate between local and global scope.\par
Scope in C++ refers to the region within a program where a variable can be accessed and used. It determines the variable's visibility and lifetime.\par
Types of Scope in C++:\par
Local Scope:\par
Declaration: Declared within a block of code (e.g., inside a function, loop, or conditional statement).\par
Lifetime: Exists only within that specific block.\par
Access: Can only be accessed within the block where it's declared.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
int main() \{\par
    int x = 10; // 'x' is local to the 'main' function\par
    // ...\par
\} \par
Global Scope:\par
\par
Declaration: Declared outside of any function.\par
\par
Lifetime: Exists throughout the entire program's execution.\par
\par
Access: Can be accessed from any part of the program (including within functions).\par
\par
Example:\par
\par
C++\par
\par
int global_var = 20; // 'global_var' is a global variable\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    // ...\par
\}\par
Key Differences:\par
Feature\tab Local Scope\tab Global Scope\par
Declaration\tab Within a block of code\tab Outside any function\par
Lifetime\tab Exists only within the block\tab Exists throughout the program\par
Access\tab Accessible only within the block\tab Accessible from anywhere in the program\par
Memory Allocation\tab Allocated on the stack\tab Allocated in the data segment\par
Export to Sheets\par
Important Considerations:\par
Overloading: If a local variable has the same name as a global variable within a function, the local variable takes precedence within that function.\par
Global Variables: While they provide easy access, excessive use of global variables can make code harder to debug and maintain, as they can be modified unexpectedly from different parts of the program.\par
3.Explain recursion in C++ with an example.\par
What is Recursion?\par
Recursion is a powerful programming technique where a function calls itself, either directly or indirectly.\par
It's like a set of nested mirrors, reflecting the same problem with smaller and smaller inputs until a base case is reached.\par
Key Concepts:\par
Base Case: The condition that stops the recursion. Without a base case, the function would call itself infinitely, leading to a stack overflow.\par
Recursive Step: The part of the function where it calls itself with a modified input, moving closer to the base case.\par
Example: Factorial of a Number\par
C++\par
\par
int factorial(int n) \{\par
    if (n == 0) \{ // Base case: factorial of 0 is 1\par
        return 1;\par
    \} else \{ \par
        return n * factorial(n - 1); // Recursive step\par
    \}\par
\}\par
Explanation:\par
Base Case: If n is 0, the function returns 1 directly.\par
Recursive Step: If n is greater than 0, the function calculates n multiplied by the factorial of n-1. This effectively breaks down the calculation into smaller subproblems.\par
How it Works:\par
Call factorial(5):\par
5 * factorial(4)\par
Call factorial(4):\par
4 * factorial(3)\par
Call factorial(3):\par
3 * factorial(2)\par
Call factorial(2):\par
2 * factorial(1)\par
Call factorial(1):\par
1 * factorial(0)\par
Call factorial(0):\par
Returns 1 (Base Case)\par
The results are then multiplied back up the chain: 1 * 2 * 3 * 4 * 5 = 120\par
Advantages of Recursion:\par
Elegance: Can provide concise and elegant solutions for certain problems.\par
Natural Representation: Some problems are inherently recursive (e.g., tree traversals).\par
Disadvantages of Recursion:\par
Stack Overflow: Deeply nested recursive calls can consume a significant amount of stack memory, potentially leading to a stack overflow error.\par
Performance Overhead: Function calls have some overhead, and excessive recursion can impact performance.\par
4.What are function prototypes in C++? Why are they used?\par
Definition: A function prototype is a declaration of a function that tells the compiler about the function's existence before its actual definition.\par
Syntax:\par
C++\par
return_type function_name(data_type1 arg1, data_type2 arg2, ...); \par
return_type: The data type of the value the function will return (e.g., int, float, void).\par
function_name: The unique name of the function.\par
data_type: The data type of each argument.\par
arg: The name of each argument (optional in the prototype).\par
Example:\par
C++\par
int addNumbers(int a, int b); // Function prototype \par
Why Use Function Prototypes?\par
Order of Definition: Function prototypes allow you to use a function before its definition appears in the code. This is crucial because C++ generally requires that functions be declared before they are used. \~ \par
Compiler Information: Prototypes provide essential information to the compiler: \~ \par
Return Type: The compiler needs to know the return type to allocate appropriate memory for the function's result.\par
Function Name: Ensures that the function is called correctly.\par
Argument Types: Allows the compiler to perform type checking during function calls, ensuring that the correct data types are passed as arguments. \~ \par
Code Readability: Prototypes improve code readability by providing a clear overview of the functions used in a program, including their names, return types, and parameters.\par
\b 5. Arrays and Strings\fs56\par
\b0\fs40 1. What are arrays in C++? Explain the difference between single-dimensional and multi-dimensional arrays.\par
Certainly, let's explore arrays in C++.\par
What are Arrays in C++?\par
An array is a collection of elements of the same data type stored in contiguous memory locations.\par
You can access individual elements within the array using an index.\par
Arrays are a fundamental data structure in C++ for efficiently storing and manipulating ordered collections of data.\par
Types of Arrays:\par
Single-Dimensional Array:\par
A linear arrangement of elements.\par
Represented as a single row or column.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
int numbers[5] = \{1, 2, 3, 4, 5\}; // Array of 5 integers\par
Multi-Dimensional Array:\par
Arrays with more than one dimension.\par
Common types:\par
Two-Dimensional Array (Matrix): Represents data in rows and columns.\par
C++\par
int matrix[3][3] = \{ \par
    \{1, 2, 3\}, \par
    \{4, 5, 6\}, \par
    \{7, 8, 9\} \par
\}; \par
Three-Dimensional Array: Represents data in a three-dimensional space (e.g., for 3D graphics).\par
Key Differences:\par
Feature\tab Single-Dimensional Array\tab Multi-Dimensional Array\par
Structure\tab Linear\tab Multiple dimensions (e.g., rows and columns)\par
Memory\tab Contiguous memory allocation\tab Contiguous memory allocation, but organized into rows, columns, etc.\par
Access\tab Accessed using a single index\tab Accessed using multiple indices (e.g., row and column indices for 2D arrays)\par
Representation\tab Often visualized as a single row or column\tab Often visualized as a table (2D) or more complex structures (higher dimensions)\par
Export to Sheets\par
Key Points:\par
Array Size: The size of an array (number of elements) must be specified during declaration.\par
Zero-Based Indexing: In C++, array indices start from 0. For example, in an array of size 5, the valid indices are 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4.\par
Memory Allocation: Arrays are typically allocated on the stack during runtime.\par
2. Explain string handling in C++ with examples\par
String Handling in C++\par
\par
In C++, you can handle strings in two primary ways:\par
C-style Strings (Character Arrays):\par
A sequence of characters stored in a contiguous block of memory.\par
Terminated by a null character (\\0).\par
Example:\par
C++\par
char myString[] = "Hello, world!"; \par
C++ string Class:\par
A more convenient and safer way to handle strings.\par
Defined in the <string> header.\par
Provides built-in functions for various string operations.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string> \par
using namespace std;\par
int main() \{\par
    string myString = "Hello, world!"; \par
    cout << myString << endl; \par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Key String Operations:\par
Concatenation: Combining two or more strings.\par
C-style: strcat() function\par
C++: + operator or append() method\par
Comparison: Comparing strings for equality, less than, greater than, etc.\par
C-style: strcmp() function\par
C++: ==, !=, <, >, <=, >= operators\par
Length: Determining the length of a string.\par
C-style: strlen() function\par
C++: length() or size() method\par
Substrings: Extracting a portion of a string.\par
C-style: substr() function\par
C++: substr() method\par
Searching: Finding the position of a substring within a string.\par
C-style: strstr() function\par
C++: find() method\par
Example: String Concatenation\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string> \par
using namespace std;\par
int main() \{\par
    string firstName = "John";\par
    string lastName = "Doe";\par
    string fullName = firstName + " " + lastName; \par
    cout << fullName << endl; \par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Advantages of C++ string Class:\par
Easier to Use: Provides a more intuitive and object-oriented approach to string manipulation.\par
Safer: Handles memory management automatically, reducing the risk of buffer overflows.\par
More Features: Offers a wider range of built-in functions for string operations.\par
3. How are arrays initialized in C++? Provide examples of both 1D and 2D arrays\par
Certainly, let's explore how arrays are initialized in C++.\par
Initialization of Arrays in C++\par
In C++, you can initialize arrays during their declaration in a few ways:\par
1. List Initialization:\par
1D Array:\par
C++\par
int numbers[5] = \{10, 20, 30, 40, 50\}; \par
This initializes an integer array numbers with 5 elements, directly assigning values to each element within the curly braces.\par
2D Array:\par
C++\par
int matrix[2][3] = \{\{1, 2, 3\}, \{4, 5, 6\}\}; \par
This initializes a 2D array (a matrix) with 2 rows and 3 columns. The values are assigned row-wise within nested curly braces.\par
2. Partial Initialization:\par
1D Array:\par
C++\par
int values[5] = \{1, 2, 3\}; \par
If you provide fewer values than the array size, the remaining elements are automatically initialized to zero. In this case, values[3] and values[4] would be 0.\par
2D Array:\par
C++\par
int matrix[2][3] = \{\{1, 2\}, \{4, 5\}\}; \par
Similarly, for 2D arrays, if you don't provide values for all elements, the remaining elements will be initialized to zero.\par
3. Initialization with a Single Value:\par
You can initialize all elements of an array to the same value:\par
C++\par
int scores[10] = \{0\}; // All elements initialized to 0\par
char letters[5] = \{'a'\}; // All elements initialized to 'a'\par
4. Initialization Using std::fill\par
For more complex initialization patterns, you can use the std::fill function from the <algorithm> library:\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <algorithm> \par
#include <array>\par
int main() \{\par
    std::array<int, 5> numbers; \par
    std::fill(numbers.begin(), numbers.end(), 10); // Fill all elements with 10\par
    for (int i = 0; i < numbers.size(); ++i) \{\par
        std::cout << numbers[i] << " "; \par
    \}\par
    std::cout << std::endl; \par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
This example demonstrates how to use std::fill to initialize all elements of an std::array with the value 10.\par
4. Explain string operations and functions in C++.\par
String Operations in C++\par
In C++, strings are typically handled using the std::string class from the <string> library. This provides a powerful and flexible way to work with text data. Here are some key operations:\par
1. Concatenation:\par
Using the + operator:\par
C++\par
std::string firstName = "John";\par
std::string lastName = "Doe";\par
std::string fullName = firstName + " " + lastName; \par
Using the append() method:\par
C++\par
std::string greeting = "Hello, ";\par
greeting.append(fullName); \par
2. Accessing Characters:\par
Using the [] operator:\par
C++\par
char firstChar = fullName[0]; // Accesses the first character\par
Using the at() method:\par
C++\par
char lastChar = fullName.at(fullName.length() - 1); // Accesses the last character\par
3. Finding Substrings:\par
Using the find() method:\par
C++\par
size_t position = fullName.find("John"); // Finds the position of "John"\par
4. Comparing Strings:\par
Using comparison operators (==, !=, <, >, <=, >=):\par
C++\par
if (firstName == "John") \{ \par
    // ...\par
\}\par
5. Modifying Strings:\par
Using the insert() method:\par
C++\par
fullName.insert(fullName.find(" "), " Middle"); \par
Using the erase() method:\par
C++\par
fullName.erase(0, 5); // Removes the first 5 characters\par
Using the replace() method:\par
C++\par
fullName.replace(0, 5, "Hello, "); \par
6. String Length:\par
Using the length() or size() method:\par
C++\par
size_t len = fullName.length(); \par
7. Converting to/from C-style Strings:\par
Using the c_str() method:\par
C++\par
const char* cstr = fullName.c_str(); \par
String Functions in C++\par
The <string> library provides many useful functions for string manipulation:\par
to_string(): Converts numeric values to strings.\par
stoi(): Converts strings to integers.\par
stod(): Converts strings to doubles.\par
toupper(): Converts characters to uppercase.\par
tolower(): Converts characters to lowercase.\par
substr(): Extracts a substring from a string.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string>\par
int main() \{\par
    std::string str1 = "Hello, world!";\par
    std::string str2 = "Hello, ";\par
    std::string str3 = str1 + " How are you?";\par
    std::cout << str3 << std::endl;\par
    if (str1.find("world") != std::string::npos) \{ \par
        std::cout << "Found 'world' in str1" << std::endl;\par
    \}\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
\b 6. Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming\par
\b0 1. Explain the key concepts of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP).\par
1. Classes and Objects\par
Class: A blueprint or template that defines a set of properties (data members) and behaviors (member functions) that an object will have. It's like a blueprint for creating houses; each house will have similar characteristics, but they might have different specific details.\par
Object: An instance of a class. It represents a real-world entity with specific values for its properties. For example, a "car" class might have properties like "color," "model," and "speed." An object of the "car" class would be a specific car with a particular color, model, and speed.\par
2. Encapsulation\par
Bundling data (properties) and methods (functions) that operate on that data within a single unit (class).\par
Hides the internal implementation details of an object, protecting the data from unauthorized access or modification.\par
Promotes data integrity and modularity.\par
3. Abstraction\par
Showing only the essential features of an object to the outside world, hiding unnecessary details.\par
Simplifies the interface, making it easier to use and understand.\par
For example, you don't need to know how a car's engine works to drive it; you only need to know how to use the steering wheel, pedals, and other controls.\par
4. Inheritance\par
A mechanism that allows a class (subclass or derived class) to inherit properties and behaviors from another class (superclass or base class).1 \~ \par
1.\par
github.com\par
github.com\par
Promotes code reusability and reduces redundancy.\par
Creates a hierarchical relationship between classes.\par
5. Polymorphism\par
The ability of objects of different classes to be treated as objects of a common type.\par
Enables flexibility and extensibility in code.\par
Achieved through function overloading and method overriding.\par
Example:\par
Let's consider a "Shape" class as an example:\par
C++\par
class Shape \{\par
public:\par
    virtual double getArea() = 0; // Pure virtual function (abstract)\par
\};\par
class Circle : public Shape \{\par
private:\par
    double radius;\par
public:\par
    Circle(double r) : radius(r) \{\}\par
    double getArea() override \{ \par
        return 3.14159 * radius * radius; \par
    \}\par
\};\par
class Rectangle : public Shape \{\par
private:\par
    double width, height;\par
public:\par
    Rectangle(double w, double h) : width(w), height(h) \{\}\par
    double getArea() override \{ \par
        return width * height; \par
    \}\par
\};\par
In this example:\par
Shape is an abstract class with a pure virtual function getArea().\par
Circle and Rectangle are concrete classes that inherit from Shape and provide their own implementations for the getArea() method.\par
By using polymorphism, you can treat objects of both Circle and Rectangle as objects of the Shape class, allowing for more flexible and generic code.\par
2. What are classes and objectsin C++? Provide an example.\par
Classes and Objects in C++\par
In C++, classes and objects are fundamental concepts in object-oriented programming (OOP).\par
Class:\par
A blueprint or template that defines a set of properties (data members) and behaviors (member functions) that an object will have.\par
It acts as a user-defined data type.\par
Example: A class named Car could have properties like color, model, and speed, and functions like startEngine(), accelerate(), and brake().\par
Object:\par
An instance of a class.\par
It represents a real-world entity with specific values for its properties.\par
Example: A specific car with a particular color, model, and speed would be an object of the Car class.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string>\par
using namespace std;\par
class Car \{\par
public:\par
    string color;\par
    string model;\par
    int speed;\par
    void startEngine() \{\par
        cout << "Engine started." << endl;\par
    \}\par
    void accelerate() \{\par
        speed += 10;\par
        cout << "Accelerating... Current speed: " << speed << " km/h" << endl;\par
    \}\par
    void brake() \{\par
        if (speed > 0) \{\par
            speed -= 5;\par
            cout << "Braking... Current speed: " << speed << " km/h" << endl;\par
        \} else \{\par
            cout << "Car is already stopped." << endl;\par
        \}\par
    \}\par
\};\par
int main() \{\par
    // Create an object of the Car class\par
    Car myCar;\par
    // Set properties of the object\par
    myCar.color = "Red";\par
    myCar.model = "Ferrari";\par
    myCar.speed = 0;\par
    // Use member functions of the object\par
    myCar.startEngine();\par
    myCar.accelerate();\par
    myCar.accelerate();\par
    myCar.brake();\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
In this example:\par
We define a Car class with data members (color, model, speed) and member functions (startEngine(), accelerate(), brake()).\par
We create an object myCar of the Car class.\par
We access and modify the object's properties using the dot operator (.).\par
We call the object's member functions to perform actions.\par
This demonstrates the basic concept of classes and objects in C++. Classes provide a structured way to represent real-world entities, and objects are instances of those classes with specific values.\par
3. What is inheritance in C++? Explain with an example.\par
Inheritance\par
In C++, inheritance is a fundamental concept in object-oriented programming that allows a class (called the derived class or subclass) to inherit the properties and behaviors (data members and member functions) of another class (called the base class or superclass).\par
This promotes code reusability and helps to organize code into a hierarchical structure.\par
Example:\par
Let's consider a scenario where we have a Shape class as the base class:\par
C++\par
class Shape \{\par
public:\par
    virtual double getArea() = 0; // Pure virtual function (abstract)\par
\};\par
This Shape class is an abstract class because it contains a pure virtual function (getArea()). An abstract class cannot be instantiated directly.\par
Now, let's create two derived classes, Circle and Rectangle, that inherit from the Shape class:\par
C++\par
class Circle : public Shape \{\par
private:\par
    double radius;\par
public:\par
    Circle(double r) : radius(r) \{\}\par
    double getArea() override \{ \par
        return 3.14159 * radius * radius; \par
    \}\par
\};\par
class Rectangle : public Shape \{\par
private:\par
    double width, height;\par
public:\par
    Rectangle(double w, double h) : width(w), height(h) \{\}\par
    double getArea() override \{ \par
        return width * height; \par
    \}\par
\};\par
In this example:\par
Circle and Rectangle inherit from Shape.\par
They both override the getArea() method to provide their specific area calculations.\par
By using inheritance:\par
We avoid code duplication by defining the common behavior (the getArea() method) in the base class.\par
We establish a clear relationship between different classes, making the code more organized and easier to understand.\par
We can treat objects of Circle and Rectangle as objects of the Shape class (through polymorphism), which enhances code flexibility.\par
This is a simplified example, but it demonstrates the core concept of inheritance in C++. Inheritance is a powerful tool for creating well-structured and maintainable object-oriented programs.\par
4. What is encapsulation in C++? How isit achieved in classes?\par
Encapsulation\par
In C++, encapsulation is a fundamental principle of object-oriented programming (OOP) that involves bundling data (properties) and methods (functions) that operate on that data within a single unit (class).\par
It aims to protect the data from unauthorized access or modification.\par
How Encapsulation is Achieved in Classes:\par
Access Specifiers:\par
Public: Members (data members and member functions) declared as public are accessible from anywhere outside the class.\par
Private: Members declared as private are only accessible within the class itself. They cannot be directly accessed or modified from outside the class.\par
Protected: Members declared as protected are accessible within the class itself and its derived classes (in case of inheritance).\par
Getter and Setter Methods:\par
To access or modify private data members, you can create public member functions called getter (accessor) and setter (mutator) methods.\par
A getter method returns the value of a private data member.\par
A setter method sets the value of a private data member, often with some validation or constraints.\par
Example:\par
C++\par
class Employee \{\par
private:\par
    string name;\par
    int employeeID;\par
    double salary;\par
public:\par
    Employee(string n, int id, double s) : name(n), employeeID(id), salary(s) \{\}\par
    string getName() const \{ \par
        return name; \par
    \}\par
    void setName(string n) \{ \par
        name = n; \par
    \}\par
    int getEmployeeID() const \{ \par
        return employeeID; \par
    \}\par
    double getSalary() const \{ \par
        return salary; \par
    \}\par
    void setSalary(double s) \{ \par
        if (s >= 0) \{ \par
            salary = s; \par
        \} else \{ \par
            cout << "Invalid salary." << endl; \par
        \}\par
    \}\par
\};\par
In this example:\par
name, employeeID, and salary are private data members, protecting them from direct access outside the class.\par
The getName(), getEmployeeID(), getSalary(), and setSalary() methods provide controlled access to these private members.\par
Benefits of Encapsulation:\par
Data hiding: Protects the internal state of an object from unauthorized access and modification.\par
Increased security: Reduces the risk of accidental or intentional data corruption.\par
Improved maintainability: Changes to the internal implementation of a class can be made without affecting other parts of the code.\par
Enhanced code reusability: Encapsulated classes can be easily reused in different parts of a program or in other projects.\b\par
}
 